[INFRA/CORE] First draft of game design implementation (#20)
SOMAS2020/SOMAS-Final-Report: 03_gamedesign/index.tex

\chapter{Game Design}

\section{Implementation}
\label{sec:GD:implementation}

> Implementation design was important as majority the class were involved in writing simulation code. As such, dedicated \emph{infrastructure} engineers from each team were elected to form an infrastructure team responsible for building the central part of the game, otherwise known as the \emph{server}. Each team's infrastructure engineer was tasked to own the implementation of a slice of the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementation design was important as the majority of the class were involved in writing simulation code. As such, dedicated \emph{infrastructure} engineers from each team were elected to form an infrastructure team responsible for building the central part of the game, otherwise known as the \emph{server}. Each team's infrastructure engineer was tasked to own the implementation of a slice of the server.
```

> One such sub-team was the \textbf{core} infrastructure team, responsible for building the core parts of the game server. Inputs were taken from the entire class to choose the best implementation strategies and design--a solid and simple core foundation was paramount to allow clean continuous integration of code and ideas from all contributors. The subsections below detail implementation specifics of the game's simulation.

Reviewer: I think we ought to have a section (just a sentence) on core's general role on PR review / ensuring each infra engineers contributions could work together properly and helping to resolve inter team incompatibilities

Author: yeah, let's add that later. doesn't feel right to put it in game design IMO.

> One such sub-team was the \textbf{core} infrastructure team, responsible for building the core parts of the game server. Inputs were taken from the entire class to choose the best implementation strategies and design--a solid and simple core foundation was paramount to allow clean continuous integration of code and ideas from all contributors. The subsections below detail implementation specifics of the game's simulation.

Reviewer 2: beautiful intro

\subsection{Architecture}
\label{sec:GD:implementation:arch}

> The structure of the game was closely modelled after a \emph{client-server} model\footnote{\url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Client-server_model}}, but note ``closely''--whilst the nomenclature was taken directly from the aforementioned model, there are some differences. \emph{Server} and \emph{client} in this context bear the following definitions:

Reviewer 2: is there potentially a more academic citation than w i k e p i d i a

Author: yes we shall put that in after #18

Author: #21 created for this

\begin{definition} \label{def:server}
    The \textbf{server} is the central game runner, responsible for initiating game events (such as a disaster or the start of a turn). Certain events require the actions of agents, in which the server will invoke a function on the agents to receive a response. Further, the server acts as a source-of-truth for the game's state.
\end{definition}

\begin{definition} \label{def:client}
    Each \textbf{client} is implemented by an agent. The client provides an interface of functions in which the server can invoke. Moreover, clients may also invoke certain functions from the server's interface to read specific game information.
\end{definition}

> The major difference of this architecture to a traditional client-server model is that, in the former, the stateful central server drives the other clients (by triggering events and eliciting responses), as opposed to clients sending stateless requests to a server to receive a response in the latter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The major difference of this architecture to a traditional client-server model is that, in the former, the stateful central server drives the other clients (by triggering events and eliciting responses), as opposed to clients sending stateless requests to a server to receive a response in the latter. Furthermore, whilst the client and server have been separated architecturally, it still operates as a single process.

```

Author: i talked about IPC later on, so this might not be worthy of mention now?

Reviewer: I think its worthwhile to mention because it's a something that someone might easily assume when you say that you have a client server architecture, so i think pointing out now that this (them being in different processes) is NOT the case makes it clearer in the natural order of reading even though it is covered in more detail later

Author: sgtm

> The major difference of this architecture to a traditional client-server model is that, in the former, the stateful central server drives the other clients (by triggering events and eliciting responses), as opposed to clients sending stateless requests to a server to receive a response in the latter. Furthermore, whilst the client and server have been separated architecturally, it still operates as a single process.

Reviewer 2: suggested re-write: consider replacing it with "the entire system" so it is clearer what "it" is referring to
```suggestion
The major difference of this architecture to a traditional client-server model is that, in the former, the stateful central server drives the other clients (by triggering events and eliciting responses), as opposed to clients sending stateless requests to a server to receive a response in the latter. Furthermore, whilst the client and server have been separated architecturally, the entire system still operates as a single process.
```

\label{sec:GD:implementation:techstack}

Agreeing on a technology stack proved to be challenging--the class had varying levels of programming expertise. Whilst Prolog\footnote{\url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prolog}} and Qu-Prolog\footnote{\url{https://staff.itee.uq.edu.au/pjr/HomePages/QuPrologHome.html}} (an extension to the former) were used to cover topics in the lectures, the class did not favour it over more well-known and established imperative programming languages. Hence, time was dedicated to formulate a consensus to decide on the technology stack, with primary focus given on the choice of implementation language. Firstly, high priority requirements were defined for the stack:

\begin{itemize}
    \item Easy to learn
    \item Easy to setup
    \item Cross-platform
    \item Easily maintainable
    \item Friendly features
\end{itemize}

Minimum Working Examples (MWEs) comprising a single server and two clients were created in different stacks, which served as starting points for discussion among members of the class. The MWEs implemented are as follows.

\begin{enumerate}
    \item \textbf{Multi-language}\footnote{\url{https://github.com/SOMAS2020/somas-demo}}.

>           A multi-language (C++ server with a Python and a C++ client) MWE was first set up. It was first thought that allowing agent teams to choose the programming language they were most familiar with would speed up development. However, despite this stack's benefits, it could not be easily made cross-platform. Each agent's code would need to be run in a separate process, and Inter-Process Communication (IPC) would be required to pass messages. IPC is quite low-level and varies vastly among different systems. Further, protocols for the IPC would also need to be set up to pass the correct message, and having no strong typing as in a strongly-typed language (or session-typed\footnote{\url{https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.03836}}) approach would make it difficult to maintain and develop.

Reviewer 2: should these citations be footnotes - they should probably be referenced in a bibliography but this can be done in a later PR

Author: yeah after #18, (I cbf to do it lmao)

Author: #21 created for this

>           A multi-language (C++ server with a Python and a C++ client) MWE was first set up. It was first thought that allowing agent teams to choose their own programming language they are most familiar with would speed up development. However, despite this stack's benefits, it could not be easily made cross-platform. Each agent's code would need to be run in a separate process, and Inter-Process Communication (IPC) would be required to pass messages. IPC is quite low-level and varies vastly among different systems. Further, protocols for the IPC would also need to be set up to pass the correct message, and having no strong typing as in a strongly-typed language (or session-typed\footnote{\url{https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.03836}}) approach would make it difficult to maintain and develop.

Reviewer 3: Suggestion:
```suggestion
          A multi-language (C++ server with a Python and a C++ client) MWE was first set up. It was first thought that allowing agent teams to choose the programming language they were most familiar with would speed up development. However, despite this stack's benefits, it could not be easily made cross-platform. Each agent's code would need to be run in a separate process, and Inter-Process Communication (IPC) would be required to pass messages. IPC is quite low-level and varies vastly among different systems. Further, protocols for the IPC would also need to be set up to pass the correct message, and having no strong typing as in a strongly-typed language (or session-typed\footnote{\url{https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.03836}}) approach would make it difficult to maintain and develop.
```

    \item \textbf{Python}\footnote{\url{https://github.com/SOMAS2020/somas-demo-py}}.

>           Python\footnote{\url{https://www.python.org/}} is widely used by the scientific community in recent years with the growing ubiquity of scientific computation packages available for it. As such, Python was a strong contender as most of the class already know Python from past projects. However, Python's weak typing meant it scored low on the ``easily maintainable'' part--the server and client interfaces would benefit a lot from strong typing. While add-on static typing tools such as \texttt{mypy}\footnote{\url{https://mypy.readthedocs.io/}} could be employed (it is also used in the MWE), it would still not be as powerful as built-in strong typing as in languages such as C\# and Go.

Reviewer 2: it's potentially also worth mentioning Pythons poor cross platform support with different package and library versions also made it a weaker contender

Author: Ah - good point, we don't want to flood this with too much impl. detail though so I chose to keep it short.

    \item \textbf{C\#}\footnote{\url{https://github.com/SOMAS2020/somas-demo-cs}}.

>           C\#\footnote{\url{https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/}} is the flagship language of the .NET ecosystem. C\# shares a large part of its design to the more popular C++. C\# is strongly-typed, and promotes use of clean Object-Oriented Programming (OOP). A drawback is that some experience with C-family languages is required to pick up C\# quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          C\#\footnote{\url{https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/}} is the flagship language of the .NET ecosystem. C\# shares a large part of its design to the more popular C++. C\# is strongly-typed, and promotes use of clean Object-Oriented Programming (OOP). Many of the features from C/C++ that can be \emph{dangerous} are not present or hidden, making it more beginner friendly. A drawback is that some experience with C-family languages is required to pick up C\# quickly.
```

        \\
        \hline
        Multi-language            &
        6                         &
        2                         &
        0                         &
        2                         &
        10                        &
        20
        \\
        \hline
        Python                    &
        8                         &
        6                         &
        8                         &
        3                         &
        8                         &
        34
        \\
        \hline
        C\#                       &
        6                         &
        5                         &
        8                         &
        9                         &
        8                         &
        37
        \\
        \hline
        Go                        &
        8                         &
        8                         &
        10                        &
        8                         &
        6                         &
        40
        \\
        \hline
    \end{tabular}
\end{table}

\subsection{Visualisations}
\label{sec:GD:implementation:visualisations}

\subsubsection{Toolchain}

> A benefit from the choice of the Go technology stack was that it supports compiling source code into WebAssembly out of the box. WebAssembly can be run in most modern browsers, which meant that in-browser simulations can be run and then visualised on a website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A benefit from the choice of the Go technology stack was that it supports compiling source code into WebAssembly out of the box. WebAssembly can be run efficiently in most modern browsers, which meant that in-browser simulations can be run and then visualised on a website.
```

The website (\url{https://somas2020.github.io/SOMAS2020/}) features... % TODO:- Vis team: yp717 et al.

\subsection{Engineering Practices}
\label{sec:GD:implementation:practices}

> Developing and maintaining a codebase with contributions from around 40 developers were projected to be not easy. Therefore, we employed good software engineering practices and rules to be upheld by all contributors to make the process smoother and--where possible--automated.

Reviewer: Should it be "was projected"? I think the subject is the singular activity of "developing and maintaining"

Author: LMAO I looked at this for a whole minute, i actually don't know

Author: changed to was

> Developing and maintaining a codebase with contributions from around 40 developers was projected to be not easy. Therefore, good software engineering practices and rules were employed to be upheld by all contributors to make the process smoother and--where possible--automated.

Reviewer 2: to be not easy -> not to be easy

Author: changed to `projected to be non-trivial` -- cleaerer

\subsubsection{Code testing}

While Go is strongly typed and would mean that most errors can be detected at compile-time (or even at time of coding with its performant language server), having unit and integration tests greatly improved the maintainability and ease of development of the project--these issues were particularly important as this was a large-scale group software engineering project--developers stepping on each other's toes is a common occurrence in non-tested group project code. Henceforth, tests were required for non-trivial server-side code.

\subsection{Peer Review}

> Peer review was also setup via GitHub pull requests--each change required the approval of another member in the infrastructure team. This practice not only promoted consistent code design and implementation, it minimised mistakes and ensured that the code implementation meets design and implementation requirements set forth. Further, as there was variation in programming skill among code contributors, knowledge sharing was facilitated by code reviews.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Peer review was also setup via GitHub pull requests--each change required the approval of another member in the infrastructure team. This practice not only promoted consistent code design and implementation, it minimised mistakes and ensured that the code implementation meets design and implementation requirements set forth. Further, as there was variation in programming skill among code contributors, knowledge sharing was facilitated by code reviews. This was also a critical opportunity for engineers to learn more about the other code being contributed to the project.
```
